docs/source/tools/assistant.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2019 The DAML Authors. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

DAML Assistant (``daml``)
#########################

``daml`` is a command-line tool that does a lot of useful things related to the SDK. Using ``daml``, you can:

- Create new DAML projects: ``daml new <path to create project in>``
- Initialize a DAML project: ``daml init``
- Compile a DAML project: ``daml build``

  This builds the DAML project according to the project config file ``daml.yaml`` (see `Configuration files`_ below).

  In particular, it will download and install the specified version of the SDK (the ``sdk-version`` field in ``daml.yaml``) if missing, and use that SDK version to resolve dependencies and compile the DAML project.

- Launch the tools in the SDK:

  - Launch :doc:`DAML Studio </daml/daml-studio>`: ``daml studio``
  - Launch :doc:`Sandbox </tools/sandbox>` and :doc:`Navigator </tools/navigator/index>` together: ``daml start``
  - Launch Sandbox: ``daml sandbox``
  - Launch Navigator: ``daml navigator``
  - Launch :doc:`Extractor </tools/extractor>`: ``daml extractor``

- Install new SDK versions manually: ``daml install <version>``

   Note that you need to update your `project config file <#configuration-files>` to use the new version.

Moving to the ``daml`` assistant
********************************

To move your projects to use ``daml``, and see the difference between ``da`` commands and ``daml`` commands, read the :doc:`/support/new-assistant`.

Full help for commands
**********************

To see information about any command, run it with ``--help``.

.. _daml-yaml-configuration:

Configuration files
*******************

The DAML assistant and the DAML SDK are configured using two files:

- The global config file, one per installation, which controls some options regarding SDK installation and updates
- The project config file, one per DAML project, which controls how the DAML SDK builds and interacts with the project

Global config file (``daml-config.yaml``)
=========================================

The global config file ``daml-config.yaml`` is in the ``daml`` home directory (``~/.daml`` on Linux and Mac, ``C:/Users/<user>/AppData/Roaming/daml`` on Windows). It controls options related to SDK version installation and upgrades.

By default it's blank, and you usually won't need to edit it. It recognizes the following options:

- ``auto-install``: whether ``daml`` automatically installs a missing SDK version when it is required (defaults to ``true``)
- ``update-check``: how often ``daml`` will check for new versions of the SDK, in seconds (default to ``86400``, i.e. once a day)

   This setting is only used to inform you when an update is available.

   Set ``update-check: <number>`` to check for new versions every N seconds. Set ``update-check: never`` to never check for new versions.

Here is an example ``daml-config.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   auto-install: true
   update-check: 86400

Project config file (``daml.yaml``)
===================================

The project config file ``daml.yaml`` must be in the root of your DAML project directory. It controls how the DAML project is built and how tools like Sandbox and Navigator interact with it.

The existence of a ``daml.yaml`` file is what tells ``daml`` that this directory contains a DAML project, and lets you use project-aware commands like ``daml build`` and ``daml start``.

``daml init`` creates a ``daml.yaml`` in an existing folder, so ``daml`` knows it's a project folder. It incorporates info from ``da.yaml`` in the generated ``daml.yaml``, if ``da.yaml`` is available (see :doc:`/support/new-assistant`).

``daml new`` creates a skeleton application in a new project folder, which includes a config file. For example, ``daml new my_project`` creates a new folder ``my_project`` with a project config file ``daml.yaml`` like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sdk-version: __VERSION__
    name: __PROJECT_NAME__
    source: daml
    scenario: Main:setup
    parties:
      - Alice
      - Bob
    version: 1.0.0
    exposed-modules:
      - Main
    dependencies:
      - daml-prim
      - daml-stdlib
    scenario-service:
      grpc-max-message-size: 134217728
      grpc-timeout: 60


Here is what each field means:

- ``sdk-version``: the SDK version that this project uses.

   The assistant automatically downloads and installs this version if needed (see the ``auto-install`` setting in the global config). We recommend keeping this up to date with the latest stable release of the SDK.

   The assistant will warn you when it is time to update this setting (see the ``update-check`` setting in the global config  to control how often it checks, or to disable this check entirely).
- ``name``: the name of the project. This determines the filename of the ``.dar`` file compiled by ``daml build``.
- ``source``: the root folder of your DAML source code files relative to the project root.
- ``scenario``: the name of the scenario to run when using ``daml start``.
- ``parties``: the parties to display in the Navigator when using ``daml start``.
- ``version``: the project version.
- ``exposed-modules``: the DAML modules that are exposed by this project, which can be imported in other projects.
  If this field is not specified all modules in the project are exposed.
- ``dependencies``: the dependencies of this project.
- ``scenario-service``: settings for the scenario service

  - ``grpc-max-message-size``: This option controls the maximum size of gRPC messages.
    If unspecified this defaults to 128MB (134217728 bytes). Unless you get
    errors, there should be no reason to modify this.
  - ``grpc-timeout``: This option controls the timeout used for communicating
    with the scenario service. If unspecified this defaults to 60s. Unless you get
    errors, there should be no reason to modify this.

..  TODO (@robin-da) document the dependency syntax

.. _assistant-manual-building-dars:

Building DAML projects
**********************

To compile your DAML source code into a DAML archive (a ``.dar`` file), run::

  daml build

You can control the build by changing your project's ``daml.yaml``:

``sdk-version``
  The SDK version to use for building the project.

``name``
  The name of the project.

``source``
  The path to the source code.

The generated ``.dar`` file is created in ``.daml/dist/${name}.dar`` by default. To override the default location, pass the ``-o`` argument to ``daml build``::

  daml build -o path/to/darfile.dar

.. _assistant-manual-managing-releases:

Managing SDK releases
*********************

In general the ``daml`` assistant will install versions and guide you when you need to update SDK versions or project settings. If you disable ``auto-install`` and ``update-check`` in the global config file, you will have to manage SDK releases manually.

To download and install the latest stable SDK release and update the assistant, run::

  daml install latest --activate

Remove the ``--activate`` flag if you only want to install the latest release without updating the ``daml`` assistant in the process. If it is already installed, you can force reinstallation by passing the ``--force`` flag. See ``daml install --help`` for a full list of options.

To install the SDK release specified in the project config, run::

  daml install project

To install a specific SDK version, for example version ``0.12.17``, run::

  daml install 0.12.17

Rarely, you might need to install an SDK release from a downloaded SDK release tarball. **This is an advanced feature**: you should only ever perform this on an SDK release tarball that is released through the official ``digital-asset/daml`` github repository. Otherwise your ``daml`` installation may become inconsistent with everyone else's. To do this, run::

  daml install path-to-tarball.tar.gz

Commit message:

add damlc-options to daml.yaml

docs/source/tools/assistant.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2019 The DAML Authors. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

DAML Assistant (``daml``)
#########################

``daml`` is a command-line tool that does a lot of useful things related to the SDK. Using ``daml``, you can:

- Create new DAML projects: ``daml new <path to create project in>``
- Initialize a DAML project: ``daml init``
- Compile a DAML project: ``daml build``

  This builds the DAML project according to the project config file ``daml.yaml`` (see `Configuration files`_ below).

  In particular, it will download and install the specified version of the SDK (the ``sdk-version`` field in ``daml.yaml``) if missing, and use that SDK version to resolve dependencies and compile the DAML project.

- Launch the tools in the SDK:

  - Launch :doc:`DAML Studio </daml/daml-studio>`: ``daml studio``
  - Launch :doc:`Sandbox </tools/sandbox>` and :doc:`Navigator </tools/navigator/index>` together: ``daml start``
  - Launch Sandbox: ``daml sandbox``
  - Launch Navigator: ``daml navigator``
  - Launch :doc:`Extractor </tools/extractor>`: ``daml extractor``

- Install new SDK versions manually: ``daml install <version>``

   Note that you need to update your `project config file <#configuration-files>` to use the new version.

Moving to the ``daml`` assistant
********************************

To move your projects to use ``daml``, and see the difference between ``da`` commands and ``daml`` commands, read the :doc:`/support/new-assistant`.

Full help for commands
**********************

To see information about any command, run it with ``--help``.

.. _daml-yaml-configuration:

Configuration files
*******************

The DAML assistant and the DAML SDK are configured using two files:

- The global config file, one per installation, which controls some options regarding SDK installation and updates
- The project config file, one per DAML project, which controls how the DAML SDK builds and interacts with the project

Global config file (``daml-config.yaml``)
=========================================

The global config file ``daml-config.yaml`` is in the ``daml`` home directory (``~/.daml`` on Linux and Mac, ``C:/Users/<user>/AppData/Roaming/daml`` on Windows). It controls options related to SDK version installation and upgrades.

By default it's blank, and you usually won't need to edit it. It recognizes the following options:

- ``auto-install``: whether ``daml`` automatically installs a missing SDK version when it is required (defaults to ``true``)
- ``update-check``: how often ``daml`` will check for new versions of the SDK, in seconds (default to ``86400``, i.e. once a day)

   This setting is only used to inform you when an update is available.

   Set ``update-check: <number>`` to check for new versions every N seconds. Set ``update-check: never`` to never check for new versions.

Here is an example ``daml-config.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   auto-install: true
   update-check: 86400

Project config file (``daml.yaml``)
===================================

The project config file ``daml.yaml`` must be in the root of your DAML project directory. It controls how the DAML project is built and how tools like Sandbox and Navigator interact with it.

The existence of a ``daml.yaml`` file is what tells ``daml`` that this directory contains a DAML project, and lets you use project-aware commands like ``daml build`` and ``daml start``.

``daml init`` creates a ``daml.yaml`` in an existing folder, so ``daml`` knows it's a project folder. It incorporates info from ``da.yaml`` in the generated ``daml.yaml``, if ``da.yaml`` is available (see :doc:`/support/new-assistant`).

``daml new`` creates a skeleton application in a new project folder, which includes a config file. For example, ``daml new my_project`` creates a new folder ``my_project`` with a project config file ``daml.yaml`` like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sdk-version: __VERSION__
    name: __PROJECT_NAME__
    source: daml
    scenario: Main:setup
    parties:
      - Alice
      - Bob
    version: 1.0.0
    exposed-modules:
      - Main
    dependencies:
      - daml-prim
      - daml-stdlib
    scenario-service:
      grpc-max-message-size: 134217728
      grpc-timeout: 60
    damlc-options: ["--ghc-option", "-Werror",
                    "--ghc-option", "-v"]


Here is what each field means:

- ``sdk-version``: the SDK version that this project uses.

   The assistant automatically downloads and installs this version if needed (see the ``auto-install`` setting in the global config). We recommend keeping this up to date with the latest stable release of the SDK.

   The assistant will warn you when it is time to update this setting (see the ``update-check`` setting in the global config  to control how often it checks, or to disable this check entirely).
- ``name``: the name of the project. This determines the filename of the ``.dar`` file compiled by ``daml build``.
- ``source``: the root folder of your DAML source code files relative to the project root.
- ``scenario``: the name of the scenario to run when using ``daml start``.
- ``parties``: the parties to display in the Navigator when using ``daml start``.
- ``version``: the project version.
- ``exposed-modules``: the DAML modules that are exposed by this project, which can be imported in other projects.
  If this field is not specified all modules in the project are exposed.
- ``dependencies``: the dependencies of this project.
- ``scenario-service``: settings for the scenario service

  - ``grpc-max-message-size``: This option controls the maximum size of gRPC messages.
    If unspecified this defaults to 128MB (134217728 bytes). Unless you get
    errors, there should be no reason to modify this.
  - ``grpc-timeout``: This option controls the timeout used for communicating
    with the scenario service. If unspecified this defaults to 60s. Unless you get
    errors, there should be no reason to modify this.

- ``damlc-options``: a list of tokens that will be appended to all invocations of ``damlc``; should therefore only be used for options that apply to all ``damlc`` commands.

..  TODO (@robin-da) document the dependency syntax

.. _assistant-manual-building-dars:

Building DAML projects
**********************

To compile your DAML source code into a DAML archive (a ``.dar`` file), run::

  daml build

You can control the build by changing your project's ``daml.yaml``:

``sdk-version``
  The SDK version to use for building the project.

``name``
  The name of the project.

``source``
  The path to the source code.

The generated ``.dar`` file is created in ``.daml/dist/${name}.dar`` by default. To override the default location, pass the ``-o`` argument to ``daml build``::

  daml build -o path/to/darfile.dar

.. _assistant-manual-managing-releases:

Managing SDK releases
*********************

In general the ``daml`` assistant will install versions and guide you when you need to update SDK versions or project settings. If you disable ``auto-install`` and ``update-check`` in the global config file, you will have to manage SDK releases manually.

To download and install the latest stable SDK release and update the assistant, run::

  daml install latest --activate

Remove the ``--activate`` flag if you only want to install the latest release without updating the ``daml`` assistant in the process. If it is already installed, you can force reinstallation by passing the ``--force`` flag. See ``daml install --help`` for a full list of options.

To install the SDK release specified in the project config, run::

  daml install project

To install a specific SDK version, for example version ``0.12.17``, run::

  daml install 0.12.17

Rarely, you might need to install an SDK release from a downloaded SDK release tarball. **This is an advanced feature**: you should only ever perform this on an SDK release tarball that is released through the official ``digital-asset/daml`` github repository. Otherwise your ``daml`` installation may become inconsistent with everyone else's. To do this, run::

  daml install path-to-tarball.tar.gz
